
1.0 Introduction
****************

Differential forms occur in various fields of mathematics and physics
providing a method to formulate many objects in a way which is
independent of a particular coordinate system. Although primary usage
certainly is in a theoretical context, there are situations where
actual computations have to be done. Due to the antisymmetric nature
and especially in the context of manifolds the calculations may be
quite involved and tedious, therefore, it is convenient to have tool
box for the most elaborate transformations. The price one has to pay
for the conciseness and beauty of the presentation is that concrete
evaluations are slightly more challenging than conventional methods
like vector calulus for instance.

There are many approaches to introduce differential forms: alternating
linear mappings, completely antisymmetric tensors, sections of
cotangent bundles or free vector spaces to name a few. The following
references give witness of the different methods and are ordered by
nondecreasing difficulty and rigor: [4] , [6] , [1] , [2] , [7] , [3]

Here we have to consider differential forms in local coordinates in
order to perform some nonsymbolic computations:

   \omega(x) = \sum_{1\leq j_1<\ldots<j_p\leq n}
   \omega_{j_1,\ldots,j_p}(x_1,\ldots,x_n) \,
   dx_{j_1}\wedge\ldots\wedge dx_{j_p}

The expression above is the local representation of the p-form \omega
in an open set of \mathbb{R}^n. There are many other ways to express
this fact: some authors take the sum over \{j_k=1,\ldots,n ; k
=1,\ldots,p\} then one has to multiply by the factor \frac{1}{p!},
others write it as a p-covector field, but all these have the same
meaning. The wedge product (\wedge) basically denotes  the
antisymmetric tensor product:

   \alpha\wedge\beta=\frac{1}{2}\, \left(a\otimes b - b\otimes a
   \right)

and is, although standard today, quite unhandy and there are different
notations in the literature. In the book of H.Flanders [4] it is not
used at all while H.Whitney used the symbol \vee in his representation
[7].

**Notation**: The domain "DeRhamcomplex" uses "dx*dy" for dx\wedge dy.

[1] Ralph Abraham, Jerrold E.Marsden and Tudor Ratiu.Manifolds,
    Tensor Analysis, and Applications. Springer, Auflage: 2nd
    Corrected ed. 1988. Corr. 2nd printing 1993 edition.

[2] Henri Cartan. Di erential Forms. Dover Pubn Inc, Au age: Tra
    edition.

[3] Herbert Federer. Geometric Measure Theory. Springer, Au age:
    Reprint of the 1st ed. Berlin, Heidelberg, New York 1969 edition.

[4] Harley Flanders and Mathematics. Differential Forms with
    Applications to the Physical Sciences. Dover Pubn Inc, Auflage:
    Revised. edition.

[5] L. A. Lambe and D. E. Radford. Introduction to the Quantum
    Yang- Baxter Equation and Quantum Groups:An Algebraic Approach.
    Springer, Auflage: 1997 edition.

[6] Walter Rudin and RudinWalter. Principles
    ofMathematicalAnalysis.Mcgraw Hill Book Co, Au age: Revised.
    edition.

[7] Hassler Whitney. Geometric Integration Theory: Princeton
    Mathematical Series, No. 21. Literary Licensing, LLC.

FriCAS :: DeRhamComplex
