.. status: ok


3.3 Scroll Bars
---------------

Whenever there is too much text to fit on a page, a scroll scroll bar
bar automatically appears along the right side.

With a scroll bar, your page becomes an aperture, that is, a window into
a larger amount of text than can be displayed at one time. The scroll
bar lets you move up and down in the text to see different parts. It
also shows where the aperture is relative to the whole text. The
aperture is indicated by a strip on the scroll bar.

Move the cursor with the mouse to the down-arrow at the bottom of the
scroll bar and click. See that the aperture moves down one line. Do it
several times. Each time you click, the aperture moves down one line.
Move the mouse to the up-arrow at the top of the scroll bar and click.
The aperture moves up one line each time you click.

Next move the mouse to any position along the middle of the scroll bar
and click. HyperDoc attempts to move the top of the aperture to this
point in the text.

You cannot make the aperture go off the bottom edge. When the aperture
is about half the size of text, the lowest you can move the aperture is
halfway down.

To move up or down one screen at a time, use the PageUp and PageDown
keys on your keyboard. They move the visible part of the region up and
down one page each time you press them.

If the HyperDoc page does not contain an input area (see
`ugHyperInput <section-3.4.html#ugHyperInput>`__ ), you can also use
the Home and ↑ and ↓ arrow keys to navigate. When you press the Home
key, the screen is positioned at the very top of the page. Use the ↑ and
↓ arrow keys to move the screen up and down one line at a time,
respectively.



